README.md, before:

# Octopi-1.5
## Setup
**For the steps below, ensure you are in the root directory `octopi-1.5/` unless otherwise stated.**

### Environment
1. In a conda environment with PyTorch / CUDA available, run `pip install -r requirements.txt` to install all dependencies.
2. Install Uvicorn for the API using `sudo apt-get install uvicorn`.
3. We recommend 17GiB max memory for each GPU for the two RTX 5000 Ada Generation GPUs in `configs/gpu_config.json`.

### Weights
1. Download Octopi-1.5 	 [model weights](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1YMn6V5W-_qvDlCbVSdZiufe729BOEl-A/view?usp=sharing).
2. Unzip and put the weights in `octopi_s/data/` as `octopi_s/data/weights/`.


## Quickstart
1. Set configs in `configs/demo.yaml`.
    * Absolute paths are preferred.
    * If you want to use RAG and have not generated the embeddings yet, set `rag: True` and `rag_generate_embeddings: True`. Set `rag_generate_embeddings: False` after the embeddings have been generated unless you want to regenerate them.
2. Set `load_exp_path: octopi_s/data/weights` to use our model weights.
3. For a `demo_path: ../data/demo` and `image_path: ../data/demo/rgb.png`, structure your directory like:
```
├── configs
│   └── ...
├── data
│   ├── demo
│   │   ├── 1
│   │   │   └── item.mov
│   │   ├── 2
│   │   │   ├── 1
│   │   │   │   └── item.mov
│   │   │   └── 2
│   │   │       └── item.mov
│   │   ├── ...
│   │   └── rgb.png
|   ├── embeddings
│   │   ├── physiclear_0.pt
│   │   └── ...
│   ├── llm_qa
│   │   ├── test_description_comparison_qa_{ID}.json
│   │   ├── test_samples.json
│   │   ├── test_scenario_qa_{ID}.json
│   │   ├── train_description_comparison_qa_{ID}.json
│   │   ├── train_samples.json
│   │   └── val_samples.json
│   ├── samples
│   │   ├── physiclear_0
│   │   │   ├── tactile
│   │   │   │   ├── XXX.jpg
│   │   │   │   └── ...
│   │   │   └── data.json
│   │   └── ...
│   └── tactile_datasets
│       ├── physiclear
│       │   └── ...
│       └── physicleardotted
│           └── ...
├── octopi_s
│   └── ...
└── ...
```
where `../data/demo/1` contains the tactile video of an object with only one unique part (texture-wise) while `../data/demo/2` is an object with two unique parts.

### Notebook
1. Change directory into `octopi_s/`.
2. Load `quickstart.ipynb`.
3. Run all cells.
4. Query the LLM using the pop-up box.
    * `$d(1,2)` to describe objects (`../data/demo/1`, `../data/demo/2`).
    * `$r(1,3)` to rank objects (`../data/demo/1`, `../data/demo/3`).
    * `$dr(3,2)` to describe and rank objects (`../data/demo/3`, `../data/demo/2`).
    * `restart` to restart the conversation.
    * `exit` to exit the conversation.

### API
1. Change directory into `octopi_s/`.
2. Run `uvicorn demo:app --host=0.0.0.0 --port=8000 --log-level=debug --reload`.
3. Open an API platform like Postman.
4. Refer to the [API documentation](https://github.com/clear-nus/Octopi-1.5/wiki/API) for more information on usage.


## Training / Testing
### Processing PhysiCLeAR Datasets Into Salient Frames
1. Create the directory `octopi_s/data/tactile_datasets`.
2. Download our [tactile datasets](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ckSzE4DxSiq4U34gWBIUGreImryLw94c/view?usp=drive_link).
3. Unzip and put the tactile datasets in `octopi_s/data/` as `octopi_s/data/tactile_datasets/`.
4. Run `python octopi_s/process_datasets.py --dataset_path octopi_s/data/tactile_datasets` to extract salient frame spans and generate data files mapping objects to their sample folder(s).

### Generating Question-Answer (QA) Files
1. Make sure the previous step is fully completed before you proceed to this step.
2. Set configs in `configs/generate_qa.yaml`.
3. Run `python octopi_s/generate_qa.py`.
4. Enter the scenario QA ID you want when prompted to make the QA files easily identifiable.
5. Three QA files will be generated in `output_data_dir` as `train_description_ranking_qa_{ID}.json` (description / ranking training), `test_description_ranking_qa_{ID}.json` (description / ranking testing) and `test_scenario_qa_{ID}.json` (scenario testing).

### Testing Multimodal LLM
1. Set configs in `configs/run.yaml`.
    * Set `load_exp_path: octopi_s/data/weights` to use our model weights.
    * Put at least one QA file absolute path in `test_files` and / or `reasoning_files` for it to test / reason.
    * Set `train_files: []` to skip training.
    * If you want to use RAG and have not generated the embeddings yet, set `rag: True` and `rag_generate_embeddings: True`. Set `rag_generate_embeddings: False` after the embeddings have been generated unless you want to regenerate them.
2. Run `python octopi_s/run_llm.py`.
3. Enter the experiment ID you want when prompted to make the experiment directory easily identifiable.
4. After you have generated prediction JSON file(s) for ranking and/or scenario reasoning, run `python octopi_s/evaluate_llm.py --llm_preds_path {path/to/results.json}` to get prediction results in your terminal.

### Training Multimodal LLM
1. Set configs in `configs/run.yaml`.
    * Put at least one QA file absolute path in `train_files` for it to train.
    * Set `test_files` and / or `reasoning_files` if you want it to test / reason as well.
    * Set `load_exp_path` if you want to start from an encoder checkpoint (highly recommended), else set as `null`.
    * If you want to use RAG for testing / reasoning and have not generated the embeddings yet, set `rag: True` and `rag_generate_embeddings: True`. Set `rag_generate_embeddings: False` after the embeddings have been generated unless you want to regenerate them.
2. Run `python octopi_s/run_llm.py`.
3. Enter the experiment ID you want when prompted to make the experiment directory easily identifiable.
4. If you have set `test_files` and / or `reasoning_files`, run `python octopi_s/evaluate_llm.py --llm_preds_path {path/to/results.json}` on the generated prediction JSON file(s) to get prediction results in your terminal.

### Printing Instructions for TMI
* Filament: eSun PLA+ Orange
* Nozzle diameter: 0.6mm
* Layer height: 0.3mm
* Wall thickness: 1.2mm
* Top-bottom thickness: 1.2mm
* Infill: 20% Gyroid
* Temperature: 190C for eSun PLA+
* Cooling Fan: 100%

### Assembly
1. For TAC-02, remove the metal casing with a long M1.6 screwdriver and remove the inner circuit boards and the padding. 
2. Place the circuit board into the printed TAC_bottom and TAC_top components.
3. Set the housing into the TAC-02 Finger Mount, and insert M2 screws to secure it in place.
4. For Gelsight, ensure that the data port is facing the indent of the Gelsight Mount.
5. Insert it in, then you can secure it with 2x 1.5mm screws.

Commit message:

Update README with citation and paper link
Added citation information and paper link for Octopi-1.5.

README.md, after:

# Octopi-1.5
Octopi-1.5 is visual-tactile-language model (VTLM). This repository enables you to get up and running with Octopi-1.5, and accompanies the R:SS paper.
- Paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.09985

![Octopi-1.5 Model Overview](octopi-1.5.png)

### Citation
If you find this work helpful, please consider citing us:

>@INPROCEEDINGS{YuS-RSS-25,  
>   AUTHOR    = {Samson Yu AND Lin Kelvin AND Harold Soh},  
>   TITLE     = {{Demonstrating the Octopi-1.5 Visual-Tactile-Language Model}},  
>   BOOKTITLE = {Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems},  
>   YEAR      = {2025},  
>   ADDRESS   = {LosAngeles, CA, USA},  
>   MONTH     = {June},  
>   DOI       = {10.15607/RSS.2025.XXI.058}  
>}  

## Setup
**For the steps below, ensure you are in the root directory `octopi-1.5/` unless otherwise stated.**

### Environment
1. In a conda environment with PyTorch / CUDA available, run `pip install -r requirements.txt` to install all dependencies.
2. Install Uvicorn for the API using `sudo apt-get install uvicorn`.
3. We recommend 17GiB max memory for each GPU for the two RTX 5000 Ada Generation GPUs in `configs/gpu_config.json`.

### Weights
1. Download Octopi-1.5 	 [model weights](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1YMn6V5W-_qvDlCbVSdZiufe729BOEl-A/view?usp=sharing).
2. Unzip and put the weights in `octopi_s/data/` as `octopi_s/data/weights/`.


## Quickstart
1. Set configs in `configs/demo.yaml`.
    * Absolute paths are preferred.
    * If you want to use RAG and have not generated the embeddings yet, set `rag: True` and `rag_generate_embeddings: True`. Set `rag_generate_embeddings: False` after the embeddings have been generated unless you want to regenerate them.
2. Set `load_exp_path: octopi_s/data/weights` to use our model weights.
3. For a `demo_path: ../data/demo` and `image_path: ../data/demo/rgb.png`, structure your directory like:
```
├── configs
│   └── ...
├── data
│   ├── demo
│   │   ├── 1
│   │   │   └── item.mov
│   │   ├── 2
│   │   │   ├── 1
│   │   │   │   └── item.mov
│   │   │   └── 2
│   │   │       └── item.mov
│   │   ├── ...
│   │   └── rgb.png
|   ├── embeddings
│   │   ├── physiclear_0.pt
│   │   └── ...
│   ├── llm_qa
│   │   ├── test_description_comparison_qa_{ID}.json
│   │   ├── test_samples.json
│   │   ├── test_scenario_qa_{ID}.json
│   │   ├── train_description_comparison_qa_{ID}.json
│   │   ├── train_samples.json
│   │   └── val_samples.json
│   ├── samples
│   │   ├── physiclear_0
│   │   │   ├── tactile
│   │   │   │   ├── XXX.jpg
│   │   │   │   └── ...
│   │   │   └── data.json
│   │   └── ...
│   └── tactile_datasets
│       ├── physiclear
│       │   └── ...
│       └── physicleardotted
│           └── ...
├── octopi_s
│   └── ...
└── ...
```
where `../data/demo/1` contains the tactile video of an object with only one unique part (texture-wise) while `../data/demo/2` is an object with two unique parts.

### Notebook
1. Change directory into `octopi_s/`.
2. Load `quickstart.ipynb`.
3. Run all cells.
4. Query the LLM using the pop-up box.
    * `$d(1,2)` to describe objects (`../data/demo/1`, `../data/demo/2`).
    * `$r(1,3)` to rank objects (`../data/demo/1`, `../data/demo/3`).
    * `$dr(3,2)` to describe and rank objects (`../data/demo/3`, `../data/demo/2`).
    * `restart` to restart the conversation.
    * `exit` to exit the conversation.

### API
1. Change directory into `octopi_s/`.
2. Run `uvicorn demo:app --host=0.0.0.0 --port=8000 --log-level=debug --reload`.
3. Open an API platform like Postman.
4. Refer to the [API documentation](https://github.com/clear-nus/Octopi-1.5/wiki/API) for more information on usage.


## Training / Testing
### Processing PhysiCLeAR Datasets Into Salient Frames
1. Create the directory `octopi_s/data/tactile_datasets`.
2. Download our [tactile datasets](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ckSzE4DxSiq4U34gWBIUGreImryLw94c/view?usp=drive_link).
3. Unzip and put the tactile datasets in `octopi_s/data/` as `octopi_s/data/tactile_datasets/`.
4. Run `python octopi_s/process_datasets.py --dataset_path octopi_s/data/tactile_datasets` to extract salient frame spans and generate data files mapping objects to their sample folder(s).

### Generating Question-Answer (QA) Files
1. Make sure the previous step is fully completed before you proceed to this step.
2. Set configs in `configs/generate_qa.yaml`.
3. Run `python octopi_s/generate_qa.py`.
4. Enter the scenario QA ID you want when prompted to make the QA files easily identifiable.
5. Three QA files will be generated in `output_data_dir` as `train_description_ranking_qa_{ID}.json` (description / ranking training), `test_description_ranking_qa_{ID}.json` (description / ranking testing) and `test_scenario_qa_{ID}.json` (scenario testing).

### Testing Multimodal LLM
1. Set configs in `configs/run.yaml`.
    * Set `load_exp_path: octopi_s/data/weights` to use our model weights.
    * Put at least one QA file absolute path in `test_files` and / or `reasoning_files` for it to test / reason.
    * Set `train_files: []` to skip training.
    * If you want to use RAG and have not generated the embeddings yet, set `rag: True` and `rag_generate_embeddings: True`. Set `rag_generate_embeddings: False` after the embeddings have been generated unless you want to regenerate them.
2. Run `python octopi_s/run_llm.py`.
3. Enter the experiment ID you want when prompted to make the experiment directory easily identifiable.
4. After you have generated prediction JSON file(s) for ranking and/or scenario reasoning, run `python octopi_s/evaluate_llm.py --llm_preds_path {path/to/results.json}` to get prediction results in your terminal.

### Training Multimodal LLM
1. Set configs in `configs/run.yaml`.
    * Put at least one QA file absolute path in `train_files` for it to train.
    * Set `test_files` and / or `reasoning_files` if you want it to test / reason as well.
    * Set `load_exp_path` if you want to start from an encoder checkpoint (highly recommended), else set as `null`.
    * If you want to use RAG for testing / reasoning and have not generated the embeddings yet, set `rag: True` and `rag_generate_embeddings: True`. Set `rag_generate_embeddings: False` after the embeddings have been generated unless you want to regenerate them.
2. Run `python octopi_s/run_llm.py`.
3. Enter the experiment ID you want when prompted to make the experiment directory easily identifiable.
4. If you have set `test_files` and / or `reasoning_files`, run `python octopi_s/evaluate_llm.py --llm_preds_path {path/to/results.json}` on the generated prediction JSON file(s) to get prediction results in your terminal.

### Printing Instructions for TMI
* Filament: eSun PLA+ Orange
* Nozzle diameter: 0.6mm
* Layer height: 0.3mm
* Wall thickness: 1.2mm
* Top-bottom thickness: 1.2mm
* Infill: 20% Gyroid
* Temperature: 190C for eSun PLA+
* Cooling Fan: 100%

### Assembly
1. For TAC-02, remove the metal casing with a long M1.6 screwdriver and remove the inner circuit boards and the padding. 
2. Place the circuit board into the printed TAC_bottom and TAC_top components.
3. Set the housing into the TAC-02 Finger Mount, and insert M2 screws to secure it in place.
4. For Gelsight, ensure that the data port is facing the indent of the Gelsight Mount.
5. Insert it in, then you can secure it with 2x 1.5mm screws.
